.\"-
.\" Will Landau (http://www.will-landau.com)
.\"	2013-2014
.\" License: GPL 3.0
.\"
.Dd 2013
.Dt DL 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dl
.Nd Dynamic Ledger, a minimalist dynamic personal accounting software package
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar input_ledger
.Op Ar output_ledger
.Sh OVERVIEW
.Pp
Dynamic Ledger is a program for managing personal finances. Unlike most other 
accounting programs, it gives you control over your finances even when you 
have several delayed transactions. With it, you can be exactly as frugal 
as you need to be, and you can easily avoid spending more than 
you actually have. In addition, you can use the program to clean and 
condense your ledgers to save space.
.Sh SUMMARIZING LEDGERS
.Nm
.Op Ar input_ledger
.Pp
This usage reads the ledger file whose full path is input_ledger
and prints a summary to the screen.
.Sh CLEANING LEDGERS
.Nm
.Op Ar input_ledger 
.Op Ar output_ledger
.Pp
This usage creates output_ledger from input_ledger. 
output_ledger is the path to a shortened, cleaned-up 
version of input_ledger with the same
summary information. All cleared transactions are condensed,
and all pending and locked transactions are left alone. You may
clean your ledger every so often to prevent it from getting too big.
.Sh LEDGER FILE FORMAT
.Pp
Ledger files are tab-delimited
flat files with rows as transactions and columns as fields. Here is
the content of an example ledger file.
.Pp
AMOUNT	STATUS	CREDIT    BANK       PARTITION    DESCRIPTION
.br 
-12       cn                  mybank     food	    groceries 12/13/13
.br
-10       cp                  mybank     fuel         fuel for the car
.br
-500      c	     mycard    mybank     rent	    December '13 rent payment
.br
-2.12  			mycard    mybank        	         coffee
.br
800   			          mybank     rent	    December paycheck
.br
400   			          mybank     food	    December paycheck
.br
100   		               mybank                  December paycheck
.br
100   		                                       December paycheck

.Pp
The first line is the header. The header is assumed to 
be for the user only, so you can write whatever you want in it as long
as you remember what each of the columns means. The program will ignore it
and begin processing the ledger at the second row. 

.Pp
Each of the six columns has a specific, hard-coded meaning. You cannot interchange
the columns without editing the macros in include/user_settings.h to change
the expected column order. The columns are explained in the COLUMS section.

.Sh COLUMNS
.Bl -tag -width flag
.It AMOUNT 
The amount of each transaction. Each amount must be a floating point number. 
Negative amounts represent payments and charges, while positive amounts
represent deposits and income.
.It STATUS
The transaction status of each transaction. These codes reflect the
delay status of the transactions. For example, if a transaction is pending
in a bank account, write "cp". See the TRANSACTION STATUS CODES section
for more details.
.It CREDIT
The name of the credit account associated with the transaction. Leave
blank if there is no credit account or you do not wish to provide a name
for your credit account.
.It BANK
The name of the bank account associated with the transaction.
Leave blank if you do not wish to provide a name.
.It PARTITION
The bank account partition associated with the transaction.
Use this column to divide your bank account into partitions:
i.e., money for food, money for rent, ect.
.It DESCRIPTION
A short description of the transaction. This column is 
for the user only, and the program will not process it.

.Sh TRANSACTION STATUS CODES
.Bl -tag -width flag
.It cn
You charged this transaction to a credit account, but
when you go online and check you credit account's balance,
the transaction does not show up yet.
.It cp
When you go online and check your credit account's balance,
the transaction shows as "pending".
.It c
When you go online and check your credit account's balance,
the transaction shows as "cleared". However, you have not
paid this transaction in a credit card payment yet.
.It p
When you go online and check your bank account's balance,
the transaction (or the credit card payment that
paid for the transaction) shows as "pending".
.It <BLANK>
Blank status code: when you go online and check your bank account's balance,
the transaction (or the credit card payment that
paid for the transaction) shows as "cleared".
.It l
Locked: same as the blank status code, but when the ledger is cleaned
as explained in the CLEANING LEDGERS section, this transaction will
not be condensed. It will be preserved.

.Sh EXAMPLES
Save the example ledger in the LEDGER FILE FORMAT section to ledger.txt. Make
sure fields are tab delimited. (Spaces may have been generated in copy-paste.)
Then, run:
.Pp
$ .Nm ledger.txt
.Pp
A summary should print to the screen. Next, make a condensed version of ledger.txt
with:
.Pp
$ .Nm ledger.txt out.txt
.Pp
Check that out.txt is a condensed version of ledger.txt. Since ledger.txt was
not very big, only a couple transactions are actually condensed. However,
for enormous ledgers, the cleaning feature of this program may save a lot 
of space.

.Sh BUGS
If you find a bug, please write to will.landau@gmail.com. 
Send a description of the error and a minimal working example
that reproduces it.

.Sh AUTHOR
.br
Will Landau
.br
http://www.will-landau.com/
.br
will.landau@gmail.com
.Sh COPYRIGHT
You may copy the source under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 3.0.